We begin here in the Middle East,
as the Israeli and U.S.
military's are ramping up preparations
for a possible revenge attack by Iran,
a strike
that potentially could happen at any time.
CNN's Oren Liebermann is standing by
for us over at the Pentagon.
But first, let's bring in CNN's
Nic Robertson.
He's here with me in Tel Aviv Nic.
What's the latest on a potential
retaliation strike from Iran on Israel?
I think is less optimistic
than it was just a couple of days ago.
Diplomats I've been talking to say that
the mood music around these talks set for
Thursday is not as positive and optimistic
as they were hoping for.
We have heard from a diplomat
in the region saying that there is
a likelihood
that Hamas will now attend the talks.
I think you're seeing a lot of posturing
in the run up to the talks.
We've heard that the Iranian president
today has had conversations
with the British prime minister, German
chancellor,
the Chinese foreign minister,
and to all of them.
Iranian media is reporting
he has said that Iran has the right
to respond and strike back at Israel.
So it's a very tough narrative
on all sides at the moment.
People here are bracing for a worst case
scenario.
The Iranians attack
a real concern that Iran is building up
for what may be more than just a limited
attack, that this could be a wider strike.
Of course, the U.S.
naval assets coming into the region will
provide protection for Israel and for U.S.
troops in this region.
But the fact that they've been speeded
up, the fact that they've been announced
all indicates
that the tensions are rising.
The talks Thursday may not even happen.
We might not even get that.
That said, again,
we have to read the machinations
and the language
we're hearing at the moment
as as as the sort of thing that you hear
leading up to high stakes talks
where everyone
setting out their maximalist position,
trying to pressure the other.
There is room for diplomacy, but there's
also room for mistakes and strikes.
There certainly, as our. Nic, standby,
I'm going to get back to you.
Oren Liebermann,
you're over at the Pentagon for us.
The United States has ordered, what,
a submarine, major submarine
to head to the Eastern Mediterranean
aircraft carrier.
Battle groups are on the way as well.
This is
this is a huge decision by the Pentagon.
Absolutely.
And it is arguably the largest buildup
of U.S.
forces in Central Command
in the Middle East
that we've seen since
very early in the war.
In a call with his Israeli
counterpart, Defense Secretary
Lloyd Austin said that he'd ordered
the USS Georgia a cruise missile submarine
that was already in the Mediterranean
towards Central Command,
towards the Middle East.
That is an offensive weapon,
although the Pentagon has described
these adjustments to force posture
as, quote, defensive in nature.
A submarine with its land attack
cruise missiles with its anti-ship
missiles is first and foremost a message
of deterrence to Iran and its proxies.
But it also gives the U.S.
a very powerful offensive weapon
should it choose to use them as it sees
how Iran and its proxies choose
to carry out this anticipated attack.
Austin also ordered the USS Abraham
Lincoln Carrier Strike Group
to accelerate its movements
towards the Middle East.
Just a couple of days ago,
it was in the Pacific Ocean.
So that will take time.
But it's worth noting that
Austin ordered it sped up, essentially
get there as quickly as possible,
and once it arrives,
that means it will have the Abraham
Lincoln Carrier Strike Group,
the Theodore Roosevelt Carrier
Strike Group, at least for the time being,
as well as an amphibious ready group,
which includes
destroyers and other warships
in the Mediterranean Sea.
So you see that buildup.
Of course, the crucial question is
what is Iran planning?
What are its proxies planning,
and how large will this attack be?
You can see in
the US is force posture changes.
The US is preparing for
what could be a very large attack,
at least the possibility
of a large attack.
And Oren, I spent several years
as a Pentagon correspondent.
It's pretty extraordinary
for the Pentagon to be announcing
publicly the deployment of submarines,
especially here in a sensitive area
like the Eastern Mediterranean.
Aircraft carrier battle groups,
they announce where they're heading,
but not necessarily submarines.
This is pretty amazing, isn't it?
Absolutely. Aircraft carriers,
you can track that publicly
and there are accounts that do that.
Not so with submarines.
The movement of U.S.
submarines, whether it's a cruise missile
sub, a fast attack sub, a ballistic
missile sub.
These are very secret
and nearly always done.
Not publicly.
They're they're rarely ever announced.
And if they are, that in
and of itself is a message.
The US publicly saying that the U.S.
is Georgia is headed to the region
that's very public signaling to Iran
and its proxies
that the US effectively means business
here, that the US has very powerful forces
in the region and depending
on what Iran chooses to do,
the US retains the option to use them.
Wolf, it's worth noting
this is not the first time
we have seen the US publicly announce
the moving of a submarine during this war.
Back in November and early November,
the US very publicly moved
the USS Florida, another cruise missile
submarine, into the Middle East again.
That then was a warning to Iran
and its proxies
about what they should choose to do.
This is that same message delivered
with a tremendous amount of other U.S.
forces in the region as well.
You know, the public announcement of these
submarines, where they're heading.
It's a message to Iran.
Clearly, you mess with Israel,
the United States
is going to mess with you.
That's the message
that's being delivered clearly.
Oren, thank you very much.
Nick, thanks to you as well.
I want to get some analysis right now.
Joining us, CNN political and global
affairs analyst Barak Ravid,
along with CNN military analyst,
retired U.S.
Army Major General James Spider Marks.
Let's talk a little bit, Barak,
first of all, you've been doing amazing
reporting on what's going on.
What are you hearing right now
about the timing and preparations
for a possible Iranian attack on Israel?
Good evening, Wolf.
So several things.
First, what I heard just in the last hour
from at least four sources,
two of them U.S.
officials
and two of them Israeli officials.
The assessment is that
this is not happening tonight.
That's that's what I heard from
both sides.
They think it will still
it might happen tomorrow.
It might happen the day after,
but it is not happening tonight.
Another sign for that.
President Biden's top Middle East
adviser, Brett McGurk, is
traveling to the region tonight
to Cairo to start working
or to continue working on the hostage
deal, on the Gaza hostage deal.
So the U.S.
is trying to to say by that
that, you know, business
as usual, plans
as usual, they're moving forward.
And the next thing
is that what I hear from both U.S.
and Israeli officials
is that they see two things.
First, with Hezbollah.
They see the Hezbollah's weapons
systems, long range
missiles are ready to fire at any minute.
And once Nasrallah will give the order,
they can fire on the Iranian side
extensive and significant
steps on the ground in the drone
units in the missile units
for a possible attack on Israel.
The people
are really worried about all of this.
General Marks,
give us your analysis of the U.S.
move to send this missile guided submarine
and to speed up the arrival of the USS
Abraham Lincoln aircraft carrier
battle group to the region,
to the eastern Mediterranean, right near
where I am right now.
I think it's a very wise move
on the part of our Department of Defense
to try to get another carrier
strike group into the region
to make sure that that capability has now
doubled
in size and capacity.
The announcement of a sub movement,
I think is
unnecessary
when you have a carrier strike group.
You have submarines that are a part
of that carrier strike group.
The additional announcement,
I understand it sends a strong message,
but that's out of the norm.
What we should try to do
is simply move the capacity in there
and then we've got a very broad array
of capabilities
from which to choose in terms of what
type of a response we want to try to make.
And I think what's important at this
point is if those carrier strike groups
or any element within
those are under attack or get in the way
of what Iran tries
to do, the United States
then has a choice to make in terms of how
it wants to try to respond very directly.
Is it just in support
to help defend Israel or is it to go out,
go after those capabilities
that the Iranians or their proxies
might use to harm
the United States capabilities as well?
And that offensive potential military
capability
is very, very impressive indeed.
Barak, how much would a possible
Iranian retaliation
undermine Thursday's
scheduled ceasefire talks
that are supposed to take place either
in Cairo or Doha, Qatar?
Well, first,
the talks, as far as I understand,
are expected to take place in Doha.
This is still the plan,
at least the US and Israel and the Qatari
and Japan mediators all still say that
they're going to be there on Thursday.
But there's there's Hamas.
And Hamas announced that they don't want
another round of negotiations.
And one of the interpretations of this
statement is that Hamas and its leader
in war in Gaza, in the bunker
100 feet under the ground in Gaza,
is waiting for this Iranian attack
and for a Hezbollah attack, hoping
that after such an attack,
he can get better terms for the deal.
So the possible
the possibility of an Iranian attack
when attacked by Hezbollah
will influence the talks in any case.
So I think this is a very
those two things are intertwined.